(handling-duckiebot-db21)=
# Handling - Duckiebot `DB21`

```{needget}
- An assembled `DB21` robot (e.g., `DB21M`, `DB21J`);
- An initialized `DB21` with **firmware version 1.2.2 or newer**. [Check your current firmware version](duckiebot-dashboard-use) before proceeding.
---
Knowledge on standard protocols to turn on, turn off, charge, and update the Duckiebattery software version on a `DB21` robots;
```

```{note}
The box above contains important information on the requirements. Make sure to read and follow them before proceeding.
```

```{note}
In this manual, we use `DB21` to refer to any version of the Duckiebot with prefix `DB21`, such as, `DB21J`, `DB21M`, etc.
```

(tutorial-handling-db21-video)=
## Duckiebot `DB21` handling tutorial video

```{vimeo} 527038785
```

(howto-db21-charge)=
## How to charge a `DB21`

To charge your Duckiebot, follow these steps:

- Plug in the charging cable to the free microUSB port on the `HUT`.

Note: to minimize mechanical stress on the `HUT` we recommend plugging in the charging cable once, 
and leaving the USB port end free to plug and unplug from charging instead. 
You can arrange the cable under the `DB21` top plate during operations for cable management.

- Plug in the charger to a 5V 2A source.
  ```{note}
  the battery can draw up to 2A. Feeding a higher amperage will not be a problem, but wrong voltage 
  will send the battery in [protection mode](db-opmanual-preliminaries-battery-protection).
  ```

- If the Duckiebot is turned on when charging, a battery charge indicator will appear on the top right 
  of the screen. If the Duckiebot is turned off, the LEDs will turn on. 
  In both cases, a small LED on the `HUT` near the charger port will turn green, indicating incoming power.


(howto-db21-shutdown)=
## How to power off a `DB21`

```{warning}
The proper shutdown protocol for a `DB21` requires having the Duckiebattery software version `2.0.0` or newer. 
To check the version of your battery, follow the instruction to "Verify current battery version" on 
[How to update a Duckiebattery](howto-db21-battery-update).
```

Make sure the Duckiebot has completed the booting process. You can verify this by checking the "Status" 
after running `dts fleet discover` on your laptop: a green `Ready` message will indicate that the Duckiebot 
has completed the booting process.

There are three methods to power off a `DB21`:

1. Using the **top** button (**preferred**):
    1. Press the **top** button (not the battery button) for 5 seconds and release;
    1. What to expect:
        1. The top button will blink for 3 seconds;
        1. The Duckiebot front and back LEDs turn off;
        1. In about *10* seconds, the on-board computer and the fan will shut down;
    1. **Troubleshooting:** If the display just switched to the next page and the top button did not blink, 
       try again and push harder on the top button during the 5 seconds;
1. Using `dts`:
    1. `dts duckiebot shutdown ![ROBOT_NAME]`
    2. What to expect:
        1. In about *10* seconds, the on-board computer and the fan will shut down;
        1. If the charging cable is not attached, the front and back LEDs will also turn off;
1. Through the Duckiebot dashboard:
    1. Open a browser
    1. Navigate to `http://![ROBOT_NAME].local`
    1. In the Top-Right corner, click on the `Power` options, and choose "`Shutdown`". Then confirm the action.
    2. What to expect:
       1. In about *10* seconds, the on-board computer and the fan will shut down;
       1. If the charging cable is not attached, the front and back LEDs will also turn off;


```{warning}
The following "hard" power shutdown should be only be used if the three methods above failed to shut down 
the Duckiebot, as it might lead to software corruption.
```

As a last resort, one could still perform a "hard" power shutdown of the `DB21`:
- `ssh duckie@![ROBOT_NAME].local sudo poweroff`;
- Unplugging the microUSB cable from the port marked as `5Vraspi` on the `HUT`;


(howto-db21m-poweron)=
## How to power on a `DB21`

To power on a `DB21` robot, press the button on the battery _once_.

The Duckiebot LEDs, as well as the on-board computer LED will turn on.

After a few seconds, the Wi-Fi dongle will start blinking. 
The Duckiebot LEDs will then turn to a steady white color, followed by the button and screen on the top 
plate powering on, as shown in the tutorial video above.

```{todo}
Replace "tutorial video above" with a proper reference once we have the video directive working.
```

(setup-duckiebot-ssh)=
## How to SSH to the Duckiebot

Next, let us try and log in onto our robot using the SSH (Secure Shell) protocol. We can do
so by running the command,

    ssh duckie@HOSTNAME.local

The default password is `quackquack`.

(howto-db21-battery-update)=
## How to update a Duckiebattery

To update the software running on the microcontroller in the Duckiebattery, or just checking its current 
version, use the following instructions.

***Important:***

1. Before the battery upgrade, please make sure the battery has at least 15% of charge.
2. Run all the following commands on the desktop/laptop

Make sure the Duckiebot is powered on and connected to the network. 
You can verify the latter by launching, e.g., `dts fleet discover` and finding that your Duckiebot is on the list.

1. Please update the `duckietown-shell` utility:
    1. `pip3 install --user --upgrade --no-cache-dir duckietown-shell`
    2. `dts update`
    3. `dts desktop update`
2. Update the Duckiebot:
    1. `dts duckiebot update ![ROBOT_NAME]`
3. Reboot the Duckiebot:
    1. `ssh duckie@![ROBOT_NAME].local sudo reboot`
    2. Wait until the Duckiebot reboots and the display shows information (especially about the battery).
    3. You could verify the battery related software is up and running by checking  whether the display reacts correctly to charging states when a charging cable is plugged in and unplugged.
4. Upgrade the battery firmware:
    1. `dts duckiebot battery upgrade ![ROBOT_NAME]`
        1. Note: When prompted to "double-click" on the battery button, make sure to _quickly_ click twice the _battery_ button.
        2. Note: Do not worry if you are unsure if you actually pressed the button twice or not, as the battery upgrade process will verify this.
        3. Follow the instructions in the terminal.
    2. If the command finished with the error: ```SAM-BA operation failed INFO:UpgradeHelper:An error occurred while flashing the battery. ERROR:dts:The battery reported the status 'GENERIC_ERROR'```, please try flashing again with: `dts duckiebot battery upgrade --force ![ROBOT_NAME]`
    3. If the command finished with any other error: **single** press the battery button, and start from _step 3_ again one more time. If there are still errors, please report on StackOverflow.
5. Prepare for post-upgrade checks
    1. If the battery indicates the charging states correctly, and shows the percentage number normally, proceed to _step 6_
    2. If the display shows "`NoBT`" (No battery detected), then **single** press the battery button, and run:
        1. `ssh duckie@![ROBOT_NAME].local sudo reboot`
        2. Wait for the reboot (as described in _step 3_)
        3. Then proceed to _step 6_
6. Verify current battery version:
    1. Method 1:
        1. `dts duckiebot battery check_firmware ![ROBOT_NAME]`
        2. Verify the battery version should be `2.0.2` or newer
    2. Method 2:
        1. Open a browser window
        2. Navigate to `http://![ROBOT_NAME].local/health/battery/info`
        3. Verify the battery version should be `2.0.2` or newer


(howto-hut-update)=
## How to update a `HUT`

Instructions on how to flash a Duckietown `HUT` board can be found [here](reflash-microcontroller).

```{note}
Reflashing a `HUT` is rarely needed. A notable exception is for `HUT` version 3.15 which comes with 
`DB21`s. The `HUT` version can be read on the board itself. 
```
